{"markdown":"# Accelerating Model Loading in LLM Inference by Programmable Page Cache\n\n### Yubo Liu, Hongbo Li, Xiaojia Huang, Yongfeng Wang, Hanjun Guo, Hui Chen,\n\n### Yuxin Ren, and Ning Jia, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.\n\n### [https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast26/presentation/liu-yubo](https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast26/presentation/liu-yubo)\n\n**This paper is included in the Proceedings of the 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies.**\n\n### February 24–26, 2026 • Santa Clara, CA, USA\n\n#### ISBN 978-1-939133-53-3\n\n#### Open access to the Proceedings of the 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies\n\n#### is sponsored by\n\n* * *\n\nAccelerating Model Loading in LLM Inference by Programmable Page Cache\n\nYubo Liu, Hongbo Li, Xiaojia Huang, Yongfeng Wang, Hanjun Guo, Hui Chen,\nYuxin Ren, and Ning Jia\nHuawei Technologies Co., Ltd.\n\nAbstract\n\nThis paper examines the model loading bottleneck during\nthe LLM inference startup. Existing solutions often optimize\nmodel loading performance at the expense of compatibility. However, compatibility is a crucial factor determining\nwhether a technology can be widely applied in real-world scenarios. This work achieves both high performance and strong\ncompatibility by optimizing the cache policy of the kernel\nfile system. We design PPC, a programmable page cache\nframework that allows users to customize page cache policies\nin a non-intrusive, flexible, and lightweight manner. Furthermore, we design MAIO, a cache policy implemented based\non PPC, to optimize model loading. MAIO introduces an I/O\ntemplate-based mechanism to fully utilize SSD bandwidth,\nXPU affinity, and data locality to enhance the efficiency of\nprefetching and eviction. Our evaluation shows that MAIO\nreduces the model loading latency by up to 79% compared\nto existing optimizations. In a real-world application, MAIO\nachieves up to 36% improvement in inference throughput\nover other tested solutions in the elastic deployment scenario.\n\n1 Introduction\n\nLarge language models (LLMs) are widely used in many scenarios, such as chatbot \\[26, 32\\] and code generation \\[5, 12\\].\nMaaS (Model-as-a-Service) \\[10, 15, 37\\] is a promising technology for large-scale LLM inference, and it enables users\nto directly use LLM inference services through simple APIs\nwithout being aware of the complex hardware and software\narchitectures (e.g., OpenAI \\[27\\], ModelArts \\[8\\], Bailian \\[7\\]).\nThe startup latency for inference services is a critical performance metric for MaaS systems, as it significantly impacts\nservice QoS and resource utilization. Currently, the sizes of\nmodels are enormous and continue to grow, reaching hundreds\nof gigabytes or even terabytes. This makes model loading a\nmajor bottleneck for the startup of inference services.\nTo reduce the overhead of model loading, the fundamental\n\ning; BlitzScale \\[39\\] achieves model sharing via high-speed\ninterconnects (NVLink \\[25\\], RDMA) between GPUs.\nThere is an overlooked disadvantage in the existing model\n\nThere is an overlooked disadvantage in the existing model\nloading optimizations \\[9, 39\\] trading off compatibility for\nperformance. They have a strong dependency on customized\nsoftware and specific hardware. However, compatibility is\ncrucial and determines whether a technology can be applied\nin real-world scenarios. To ensure strong compatibility for\nmodel loading optimization, we need to consider three dimensions: 1) It must be compatible with inference software\necosystems, such as frameworks and model formats. 2) It has\nno intrusive modifications to the OS kernel, as the cost of\nswitching the kernel in a production environment is extremely\nhigh. 3) It has no hardware dependencies, making it suitable\nfor a wider range of platforms.\nGoal & Motivation. The goal of this work is to provide\n\nGoal & Motivation. The goal of this work is to provide\nultimate model loading acceleration on local file systems\nwhile ensuring compatibility. According to our analysis, the\nperformance bottleneck of the kernel file system in model\nloading primarily stems from the inefficient cache policy of\nthe kernel, which is mainly reflected in: 1) The prefetching\npolicy fails to fully utilize the substantial idle bandwidth of\nSSDs. 2) The affinity of XPU has not been fully utilized. 3)\nThe eviction policy cannot accurately perceive the temporal\nlocality during model loading. Our motivation is to make the\nkernel page cache programmable and enable the policy to\nadaptively optimize for different inference services.\nProgrammable Page Cache (PPC). The cache program-\n\nThis work proposes PPC (Programmable Page Cache)\nframework to meet all three requirements. PPC consists of a\nrouting file system (RFS) in the kernel and a cache policy runtime (CPRT) in the userspace. RFS is a read-only file system\nthat stacks on top of any kernel file system. It hijacks the file\noperations of the underlying file system and allows the invo-\n\n* * *\n\nModel-Accelerated I/O (MAIO). To enhance the efficiency\nof the cache policy during model loading, the policy must\nmeet two requirements. Firstly, it must be capable of sensing\nthe I/O characteristics of model loading. For compatibility, the\npolicy needs to be independent of the inference framework,\nmaking model loading a black box. Additionally, different\ninference services have distinct I/O characteristics. Secondly,\nit should be able to perform targeted optimizations based on\nthe I/O characteristics. This means it needs to fully utilize idle\nbandwidth, XPU affinity, and temporal locality to optimize\nprefetching and eviction.\nWe design MAIO (Model-Accelerated I/O) based on PPC,\n\nprefetching and eviction.\nWe design MAIO (Model-Accelerated I/O) based on PPC,\na cache policy aimed at optimizing model loading. MAIO\nleverages a phenomenon the I/O pattern of model loading is the same across identical LLM inference services (i.e.,\nmodel, tensor parallelism, etc., are the same). Therefore, MAIO\npre-builds an I/O template for each inference service, which\ndescribes the I/O sequence of each XPU during the model\nloading. When the inference service starts, MAIO obtains its\nI/O characteristics by parsing the target I/O template. It further proposes three mechanisms interruptible prefetching,\nXPU affinity loading, and Burn-after-Reading eviction to\noptimize bandwidth utilization, host-to-device transfer efficiency, and eviction accuracy, respectively. As a result, MAIO\ndelivers state-of-the-art I/O optimization for model loading\nwhile ensuring strong compatibility.\nWe evaluate MAIO (and PPC) on five mainstream models\n\nWe evaluate MAIO (and PPC) on five mainstream models\nand the results show that model loading latency in MAIO is\nreduced by up to 79% and 74% in memory-rich and memoryconstrained scenarios, respectively, compared to existing compatible and incompatible optimization solutions. In the elastic\ninference scenario, MAIO achieves up to 36% improvement\nin throughput over other tested solutions.\nThis paper contains the following main contributions:\n\nThis paper contains the following main contributions:\nIt quantitatively analyzes the impact of cache policies on\n\nIt designs PPC, a programmable framework that allows\nusers to customize page cache policies of kernel file systems in a non-intrusive, flexible, and lightweight manner.\nIt designs MAIO, an advanced cache policy based on PPC\n\nThe rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2\nintroduces the background and motivation; Section 3 and 4\n\nintroduce the designs of PPC and MAIO; Section 5 shows the\ndetailed evaluation; Section 6 concludes the paper.\n\n2 Background and Motivation\n\n2.1 Model Loading and Goal\nThe MaaS (Model-as-a-Service) technology is widely used\n\nThe MaaS (Model-as-a-Service) technology is widely used\nin the AI industry \\[10, 37\\] it addresses the high complexity and high resource consumption problems associated with\ndeploying LLM inference services by supporting one-click\nand on-demand deployment. The MaaS platform pre-builds\ntemplates for each inference service, which describe execution parameters such as the model and parallel strategy. It\nwill elastically launch LLM inference services (templates)\nbased on user requests, while providing load balancing, fault\ntolerance, and security guarantees.\nThe startup speed of the LLM inference service is a key per-\n\nThe startup speed of the LLM inference service is a key performance metric in MaaS platforms, which can significantly\naffect the QoS and resource utilization of the system. However, LLM inference startup is time-consuming. The model\nloading stage is one of the main bottlenecks in LLM inference\nstartup, as the size of LLM models can reach hundreds of gigabytes or even terabytes. For example, it takes about one hour\nto start a DeepSeek-R1-671B inference service in our MaaS\nplatform, while loading the model from the OBS (object store)\naccounts for more than 70% of the total overhead.\n\nIncompatible Optimizations. Storing (hot) models on the\nSSDs of the inference nodes is a mainstream practice for\nperformance. On this basis, existing works further perform\ncustomized optimization within the inference framework to\nreduce the model loading latency. For example, Serverless-\nLLM \\[9\\] leverages multi-tier parallel loading and live migration to accelerate the model loading; BlitzScale \\[39\\] uses an\nO(1) caching approach, which allows the model to be directly\nshared between GPUs via NVLink \\[25\\] and RDMA. However, the key shortcoming of these works is the sacrifice of\ncompatibility. Based on our production experience, the compatibility is a decisive factor in whether the technique can be\nwidely applied across various real-world scenarios.\nTo maximize the compatibility of model loading optimiza-\n\n* * *\n\nFigure 1: SSD Bandwidth Utilization of Inference Startup.\n\na massive engineering task. For example, upgrading the kernel\nfor hundreds of thousands of nodes in our production cluster can take years. 3) No hardware dependency. The model\nloading optimization must avoid relying on specific hardware\nfeatures of particular chips (e.g., NVLink \\[25\\], HCCS \\[35\\]).\n\nDesign Goal. This work is also dedicated to optimizing model\nloading on the SSDs of inference nodes, but it targets a different goal from existing works to achieve state-of-the-art\noptimization of model loading while ensuring compatibility.\nModels are typically stored as files, and the core of optimizing model loading lies in efficiently utilizing the memory\ncache of the file system. This leads us to optimize the cache\npolicy of the kernel file system based on the I/O characteristics of model loading, while ensuring compatibility with the\ninference framework, OS kernel, and hardware.\n\n2.2 Cache Policy\n\nObservation 1: The prefetching mechanism cannot fully utilize idle SSD bandwidth and effectively hide I/O overhead.\nWe evaluate the variation in SSD bandwidth utilization dur-\n\nThe startup of the LLM inference service involves three stages:\nframework initialization (e.g., starting the container), model\nloading, and service startup (e.g., initializing KV cache). The\nmodel loading process parses the model structure and loads\ntensors one by one from the file system onto the XPU. The\ncache policy of the file system, which is the mechanism for\nprefetching and evicting data between the memory and SSD,\nsignificantly affects the model loading performance. However, the traditional cache policy in the kernel is inefficient\nfor model loading. For example, the loading overhead of\nQwen2.5-72B still reaches the minute level, accounting for\nmore than 50% of the startup overhead of LLM inference\nservice. We evaluate the I/O characteristics of model loading\nand discuss the shortcomings of the cache policy of the kernel,\nwhich lead to three observations:\nObservation 1: The prefetching mechanism cannot fully uti-\n\nadequately hidden, such as during the framework initialization\nphase and data post-processing in the model loading phase.\nThis is because the prefetching in the kernel page cache is inefficient for model loading. First, the prefetching cannot fullyModel Service\n5.64X Loading Start\nutilize the concurrency of SSDs due to limitations in the num-GAP\nber of kworkers. Second, the accuracy of prefetching is low,\nmaking it difficult for I/Os to be hidden by other processes\nAvg (1.05 GB/s)\nduring startup the kernel cache policy simply prefetches a\ncontiguous segment (e.g., 128KB) of data from the same file\nas the front-end I/O, while the I/O behavior of model loading\nis complex.\n\nObservation 2: Model loading is sensitive to XPU affinity,\nbut this dimension is overlooked by the kernel cache policy,\naffecting the efficiency of host-to-device data transfer.\nTo evaluate the impact of XPU affinity, we replicate multi-\n\nTo evaluate the impact of XPU affinity, we replicate multiple copies of the model and store them separately on tmpfs\nbound to different NUMA nodes, while modifying vLLM to\nensure that each XPU loads the model only from the tmpfs\nof its respective NUMA node. Our results show that this XPU\naffinity approach can reduce model loading latency by about\n20% compared to placing the model on a single NUMA node.\nHowever, the prefetching mechanism in the kernel cache policy cannot determine and control which XPU the data should\nbe loaded to, so it blindly loads the data into the NUMA node\nof the prefetch thread (kworker), affecting the efficiency of\nmodel data transfer from host to XPUs.\n\nObservation 3: The I/O pattern of model loading exhibits\nstrong temporal locality, but it cannot be precisely detected\nby the eviction mechanism.\nMemory-constrained scenarios are common in real-world\n\nby the eviction mechanism.\nMemory-constrained scenarios are common in real-world\nworkloads (e.g., reserved for the KV cache). Therefore, the\neviction mechanism will significantly impact the performance\nof model loading. We evaluate the model loading performance\nof Qwen2.5-72B under different available page cache sizes.\nThe result shows that when the available page cache space\nis about 45% of the model size, the model loading latency\nincreases by 38% compared to the scenario with sufficient\npage cache. Model data will remain in the XPUs throughout\nthe lifecycle of the inference service in most cases. This\nmeans that once a page of model data is loaded to XPU(s), it\ncan be evicted from the host side page cache. The kernel cache\npolicy monitors page popularity through sampling and uses\nLRU for eviction. This eviction mechanism fails to accurately\npredict the temporal locality of pages during model loading\nbecause it is unable to detect when pages are loaded into the\nXPUs. This results in invalid data not being promptly evicted,\ncausing the eviction overhead to manifest on the critical path.\n\n2.3 Motivation\n\n* * *\n\nTable 1: Comparison of Techniques for Controlling Page Cache.\n\n|  | FUSE-based | eBPF-based | Kernel-native | PPC |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| Typical System | RFUSE\\[6\\],XFUSE\\[16\\] | PageFlex\\[38\\],FetchBPF\\[4\\] | fadvise\\[29\\] | This work |\n| Non-intrusive | √ | × | × | √ |\n| Flexibility | √ | × | × | √ |\n| Lightweight | × | √ | √ | √ |\n\nChallenge 1. How to design an efficient programmable page\ncache framework? The framework must satisfy the following\nrequirements simultaneously: 1) Non-intrusive it should be\nan independent kernel module and compatible with existing\nfile systems. 2) Flexibility it needs full control over the\ncache policy logic (e.g., timing and scope of prefetching and\neviction, memory layout) and allows different policies to be\nswitched flexibly. 3) Lightweight it must have a low impact\non front-end I/O performance.\nTable 1 compares existing techniques for controlling ker-\n\non front-end I/O performance.\nTable 1 compares existing techniques for controlling kernel page cache. The FUSE-based systems \\[2, 6, 16\\] allow\nusers to customize the file system in the userspace, but they\nbring high overhead even with state-of-the-art optimizations.\nThe eBPF-based systems \\[4, 38\\] allow users to inject the\ncustomized policy into the kernel, but they fail to support\ncomplex policies (e.g., parsing I/O characteristic files) and\nflexible policy deployment/switching (e.g., they are unable to\nimplement directory-level policies). They may also require\nintrusive kernel modifications (e.g., adding helper/kfunc). The\nkernel-native system, fadvise \\[29\\], allows applications to\nexplicitly prefetch/evict pages, but it cannot deeply collaborate with front-end file accesses, which makes it difficult to\naccurately control the logic of prefetching and eviction. This\nwork leverages the idea of stacking file system and proposes\nPPC (Programmable Page Cache) framework to meet three\nrequirements mentioned above (§ 3).\nChallenge 2. How to optimize the cache policy for differ-\n\ninference services.\nExisting related works \\[9, 39\\] achieve model loading optimization by deeply coupling the I/Os and the inference sys-\n\nmization by deeply coupling the I/Os and the inference system, which violates the black-box design principle and is\nnot applicable here. In the MaaS system, the LLM inference\nservice is pre-built as a template, and the template describes\nbasic service information such as the model and parallel parameters. We found that the I/O behavior of the same template\n(LLM inference service) is reproducible. Taking advantage\n\nmization by deeply coupling the I/Os and the inference system, which violates the black-box design principle and is\nnot applicable here. In the MaaS system, the LLM inference\nservice is pre-built as a template, and the template describes\nbasic service information such as the model and parallel parameters. We found that the I/O behavior of the same template\n(LLM inference service) is reproducible. Taking advantage\n\n(LLM inference service) is reproducible. Taking advantage\nof this characteristic, we can transparently track I/Os and\n\nof this characteristic, we can transparently track I/Os and\npre-build I/O templates at the service granularity, and then\n\nof this characteristic, we can transparently track I/Os and\npre-build I/O templates at the service granularity, and then\n\nFigure 2: Architecture of PPC. RFS stacks on top of the existing file\nsystem, hijacks its cache miss process, and calls user policy through\nsystem events; CPRT provides the policy programming framework\nand policy execution runtime.\n\noptimize model loading based on the templates. By this inspiration, this work designs MAIO (Model-Accelerated I/O),\nan advanced cache policy based on PPC for model loading\nto provide adaptive prefetching and eviction optimizations\nwhile ensuring strong ecosystem compatibility (§ 4).\n\n3 Programmable Page Cache\n\nPPC is a cache policy programming framework, which runs\non top of existing kernel file systems, allowing users to customize the page cache behavior (prefetch/evict) of the target\nfile namespace. PPC includes two key designs: 1) A routing\nfile system (RFS) is proposed to allow the cache policy of\nthe kernel file system to be overridden in a non-intrusive and\nlightweight manner (§ 3.1). 2) A cache policy runtime (CPRT)\nis designed to support flexible programming and efficient execution of user-customized policies (§ 3.2).\n\nArchitecture. Figure 2 shows the architecture of PPC. The\nRFS works in the kernel, where it hijacks the page cache miss\nof the underlying file system and encapsulates its contexts into\na message, then triggers a special system event (UPC). In the\nuserspace, the cache policy runtime (CPRT) provides a VFSlike programming framework, allowing users to customize\ncache policy by overriding the functions it offers. The usercustomized policy will be compiled into the dynamic link\nlibrary and registered in CPRT. At runtime, CPRT listens\nto and parses events generated by RFS in a non-blocking\nmanner, converting them into function calls within the usercustomized policy, and efficiently executes cache prefetching\nand eviction operations.\nThis architecture enables PPC to meet the requirements\n\n* * *\n\nTable 2: Main APIs of PPC.\n\n| API | Parameter | Description |\n| --- | --- | --- |\n| mount -ppc | ppc\\_pathbase\\_path | Mount PPC on the ppc\\_pathand associate it with the base\\_path |\n| reg\\_policy | ppc\\_pathpolicy\\_pathconfig | Register the policy (policy\\_path)to the ppc\\_pathusing the initialconfiguration from the config |\n| rm\\_policy | ppc\\_path | Unload the policy on the ppc\\_path |\n\nAPIs and Usage. Table 2 shows the main APIs for enabling\nuser-customized cache policies using PPC. To change the\ncache policy on the base path (base\\_path) of the kernel file\nsystem, the following two steps must be executed: First,\nthe user calls the mount to build PPC on an empty path\n(ppc\\_path) and uses the -ppc flag to associate the PPC path\nwith the base path. Then, the user calls the reg\\_policy with\nthe dynamic link library of the policy and the PPC path as\nparameters to register the user-customized policy into the\nPPC. The reg\\_policy also allows users to pass custom data\nstructures and parameters (config) for its cache policy. After\nthese two steps, the namespace under the base path will be\nmapped to the PPC path, and POSIX file access by users on\nthe PPC path will follow the registered cache policy. It is\nworth noting that if no policy is registered, PPC will fall back\nto the default cache policy in the kernel. In addition, PPC\nprovides the rm\\_policy interface that allows users to remove\nthe registered policy.\n\n3.1 Routing File System\n\nFigure 3 shows the implementation of RFS. It utilizes the\nstacked file system mechanism to enable the cache policy of\nthe kernel file system (i.e., prefetching and eviction) to be\nchanged. Stacked file systems (e.g., OverlayFS \\[17\\]) are a\nspecial type of kernel file system that hijacks the operations\nof underlying file systems by overriding the VFS interfaces.\nThis allows developers to modify the native operations (e.g.,\nopen, read, write) without requiring intrusive modifications\nto the underlying file system.\nAfter RFS is mounted, its file namespace is a mirror of\n\nlogic using the userspace procedure call (UPC).\nSince model loading is a read-only scenario, the current\nRFS is a read-only file system and supports embedding cache\n\nAfter RFS is mounted, its file namespace is a mirror of\nthe target file namespace of the underlying file system. The\napplication uses the root path of RFS to replace the original\nworking path of the underlying file system. The VFS data\nstructures (e.g., superblock, inode, file, dentry) of RFS are\nmapped to the corresponding structures of the underlying\nfile system, and these mappings are recorded in the custom\nfields of the VFS data structures (e.g., i\\_private in inode, private\\_data in file). By stacking, RFS can call and orchestrate\nfunctions implemented in the underlying file system (i.e., operations in inode/file structures) to hijack the native file access\nlogic, then embed the user-customized policy into the native\nlogic using the userspace procedure call (UPC).\nSince model loading is a read-only scenario, the current\n\nFigure 3: Implementation of RFS. In read operation, the cache\npolicy is triggered when a cache miss occurs (red arrow); when a hit\noccurs, data is directly read (blue arrow).\n\npolicies into the read and page fault (for mmap) processes.\nWe believe that RFS can be easily extended to support write\noperations for more scenarios. Additionally, RFS does not\nmodify the native prefetching/eviction mechanisms in VFS\nbut instead disables them via system configuration.\nOperation Stacking. RFS provides standard POSIX file se-\n\nOperation Stacking. RFS provides standard POSIX file semantics, so applications do not require modification. It supports most read-only file operations:\nmount / unmount. They are used to associate/disassociate\n\nmount / unmount. They are used to associate/disassociate\nRFS with the namespace of a given underlying file system.\nThe mount process includes two steps: 1) RFS creates the\nsuperblock and binds it to the superblock of the underlying file\nsystem. 2) RFS initializes a device for UPC (detailed later).\nThe unmount process is straightforward in RFS, requiring\nonly the release of relevant metadata and devices.\nopen / close. The open operation includes two steps: 1)\n\nonly the release of relevant metadata and devices.\nopen / close. The open operation includes two steps: 1)\nVFS performs path lookup in the dentry cache. If a component\nis missing, the lookup operation of RFS creates a new dentry,\nconverts the path into the original path in the underlying\nfile system (by using the original parent dentry recorded in\nthe RFS’s parent dentry), calls the lookup operation in the\nunderlying file system to create the original dentry, and then\nrecords the original dentry in the RFS’s dentry. 2) After path\nlookup, RFS calls the open operation of the underlying file\nsystem to create a new original file structure and records it\ninto the file structure created by RFS. In the close operation,\nit only needs to reclaim the file structures of both RFS and\nunderlying file system.\nread. It includes three steps: 1) Based on the given file\n\nmmap (page fault). The file mapping process of RFS is\nsimilar to the traditional kernel file systems, i.e., creating\na VMA and binding it to the page fault operation of RFS.\n\n* * *\n\nWhen users access the mapped address, RFS will perform the\npage fault operation if the target page table is not mapped.\nThe page fault operation is similar to the read operation in\nRFS and consists of three steps: 1) It retrieves the original\ninode recorded in the RFS’s inode and checks whether the\ntarget page is in the page cache; if so, it maps the page to\nthe corresponding page table and completes the page fault\noperation. 2) If the page is missing, it sends the I/O miss event\nvia UPC. 3) It calls the page fault operation of the underlying\nfile system to load the page from disk, and then completes the\npage mapping.\nOther Operations. In addition to the file operations de-\n\nOther Operations. In addition to the file operations described above, RFS also supports common read-only metadata operations, such as stat, readdir, etc. These operations\nonly need to redirect the data structures related to the operations in RFS (e.g., inode, file, dentry) to their original data\nstructures in the underlying file system and then execute their\ncorresponding functions.\n\nUserspace Procedure Call. Each RFS creates a virtual character device for UPC, and the cache policy runtime in the\nuserspace gets I/O miss events using poll/epoll. The event\nbody includes the original file handle, offset, length, and process ID of the missing I/Os, which will be parsed by the policy\nruntime in the userspace. Then, the corresponding prefetching\nand/or eviction functions will be called. UPC ensures performance through two aspects. First, it is non-blocking, so event\nsending incurs only the overhead of enqueuing. Second, it\nutilizes per-core queues to enhance concurrency performance.\nThe event queue is implemented through xarray, enabling it\nto support dynamic length.\n\n3.2 Cache Policy Runtime\n\nCPRT adopts the programming style of VFS, i.e., users implement a cache policy by overriding functions defined in the\nppc\\_operation structure and register it in CPRT. It consists of\ntwo components: 1) The policy executor maintains a thread\npool to listen for events from RFS’s UPC and convert the\nevent body into function input parameters (e.g., mapping the\nfile handle to the path, aggregating continuous miss I/Os). It\nis also responsible for orchestrating the user-customized function calls based on I/O miss events and memory space status.\n2) The cache manager is used for efficiently loading/reclaiming pages. The programmer only needs to focus on the design\nof the policy itself and then return the I/Os to be prefetched/evicted to CPRT.\n\n1 #include \"ppc.h\"\n2 int init(void\\* private) {\n3 // Initialize the policy by \"private\"\n4 return 0;\n5 }\n6 int exit(void) {\n7 // Clean the environment and exit\n89 } return 0;\n10 struct prefetch\\_ios\\* prefetch(struct miss\\_io _mio) {_\n_11 // Utilize \"mio\" to design prefetch policy_\n_12 return ios\\_for\\_prefetch;_\n_13 }_\n_14 struct evict\\_ios_ evict(struct miss\\_io \\*mio) {\n15 // Utilize \"mio\" to design eviction policy\n16 return ios\\_for\\_evict;\n17 }\n18 const struct ppc\\_operation policy = {\n19.ppc\\_init = init,\n20.ppc\\_exit = exit,\n21.ppc\\_prefetch = prefetch,\n22.ppc\\_evict = evict,\n23 };\n24 struct ppc\\_operation \\*register\\_policy() {\n25 return (struct ppc\\_operation \\*)&policy;\n26 }\n\nFigure 4: Pseudo Code of Programming Framework.\n\na new one. Currently, each PPC instance (file namespace) can\nonly register one policy at a time. For scenarios requiring the\ncoexistence of multiple policies, users can split the namespace into several independent sub-namespaces and mount\nPPC separately, or customize different sub-policies within\na single policy based on access paths. Figure 4 shows the\nprogramming framework. There are four functions in CPRT\nthat need to be overridden by the user.\nppc\\_init() / ppc\\_exit(). The ppc\\_init() is called once when\n\nppc\\_init() / ppc\\_exit(). The ppc\\_init() is called once when\nthe policy is registered. The typical usage is for initializing the\nenvironment and global data structures during the execution\nof the policy. The ppc\\_exit() is called once when the policy\nis unloaded from PPC. Its typical usage is for gracefully\nterminating the cache policy, such as destroying global data\nstructures and environments upon normal exit, and throwing\nexceptions upon abnormal exit.\nppc\\_prefetch(). It will be called every time an I/O miss\n\nppc\\_evict(). The policy executor checks memory usage at\ntwo points: at fixed intervals and after each I/O miss event is\nreceived (before prefetching). If the memory usage exceeds\n\nppc\\_prefetch(). It will be called every time an I/O miss\nevent is received from UPC, with miss I/O information as\nthe input parameter. For scenarios where I/O behavior can be\npredicted (e.g., model loading), the policy can directly utilize\nthe miss I/O information to make prefetching decisions. For\nscenarios where I/O behavior is unpredictable, the policy can\nperceive application behavior by recording and analyzing historical miss I/O information, thereby guiding its prefetching\nactions. The function will return a prefetch I/O list, where\neach element (I/O) consists of the file path, offset, size, and\ntarget XPU ID (used for affinity loading). The cache manager\nwill parse and execute the I/Os in the prefetch I/O list.\nppc\\_evict(). The policy executor checks memory usage at the threshold (e.g., 80%), the eviction function is called. The\ninput parameter is the miss I/O information or NULL (for periodic eviction). Similar to ppc\\_prefetch(), the programmer can\nperceive immediate I/O behavior and utilize it to design the\npolicy, ultimately returning an I/O list for the cache manager\nto execute the page eviction.\nThe ppc\\_init() and ppc\\_exit() do not have a default imple-\n\nThe ppc\\_init() and ppc\\_exit() do not have a default implementation, and will be bypassed if the user does not define\nthem. PPC will fall back to the eviction policy in the kernel if\nthe ppc\\_evict() is not defined. The default implementation of\nppc\\_prefetch is similar to the mechanism of the kernel.\n\nCache Manager. It is designed to ensure simple policy programming while maximizing the utilization of the idle I/O\nresources as much as possible. The outputs of ppc\\_evict() and\nppc\\_prefetch() are merely recommendations, and the cache\nmanager will efficiently execute page loading and eviction\nbased on the current system conditions.\nFor the evictor, PPC directly uses the fadvise to inform\n\nFor the evictor, PPC directly uses the fadvise to inform\nthe kernel to preemptively release the target pages (with the\nPOSIX\\_FADV\\_DONTNEED flag). It will mark clean pages as\nreclaimable (which is not the case for dirty pages), ensuring\nbest-effort but effective reclamation in read-only scenarios\n(i.e., model loading). In addition, PPC sets the eviction threshold (used memory) below the kernel’s threshold to avoid\ntriggering the native eviction process in the kernel.\nFor the loader, the fadvise is not sufficient due to its lack\n\ntriggering the native eviction process in the kernel.\nFor the loader, the fadvise is not sufficient due to its lack\nof fine-grained I/O control. The loader maintains a core-bound\nthread pool to ensure full utilization of the SSD concurrency,\nand RFS provides an ioctl for the loading threads to efficiently call the page loading process of the underlying file system. In addition, the loader provides two important features.\n\n1. XPU affinity awareness. The policy can specify the XPU\n   affinity for the data to be prefetched, and the loader will parse\n   the XPU topology and load the data into the NUMA node\n   where the target XPU resides. 2) Interruptible. For simplicity\n   in programming, PPC assumes that the policy is unaware of\n   the system state, which may lead to aggressive issuance of\n   prefetch I/O. The loader will interrupt the ongoing loading\n   process when memory usage exceeds the threshold, I/O bandwidth is insufficient, or a new prefetch request is triggered\n   while there are no available threads in the thread pool (e.g., in\n   cases where prefetching is slower than front-end loading).\n   Programming Example. As an example, consider a simple\n\nto support other storage architectures, such as distributed\nfile systems \\[3, 14, 34\\] and heterogeneous memory file systems \\[22, 30, 36\\].\n\n3.3 Security and Reliability\n\nPPC does not compromise the security of the kernel file\nsystem because it still maintains the isolation between the\nuserspace and the kernel. CPRT and the userspace policy\ndo not directly access or modify the metadata and data of\nthe kernel file system but instead interact with the kernel\nusingpoll/epoll, which is the traditional mechanism for\nuserspace-kernel communication. At the same time, the functions in the policy run entirely in the userspace. In addition,\nPPC ensures strong reliability from two aspects. First, it can\ntolerate programming faults. The policy execution is decoupled from the kernel file system and the application, and the\nenforcement of the policy (e.g., prefetch, eviction) is achieved\nthrough standard system calls. Therefore, programming bugs\nwill only affect the processes running the policies and will\nnot impact the kernel and the application. Second, it has no\nimpact on the crash consistency. RFS does not alter the native\nsynchronization mechanism between the memory and disk of\nthe underlying file system.\n\n4 Case Study: Model-Accelerated I/O\n\nThis section introduces MAIO (Model-Accelerated I/O), an\nadvanced cache policy based on PPC. It can perceive the I/O\ncharacteristics of model loading across different inference\nservices and adaptively optimize I/O behavior, while ensuring\nstrong compatibility.\n\n4.1 Model Loading Optimized Policy\n\nThe inspiration for MAIO stems from a phenomenon the\nI/O pattern of model loading can be the same across identical LLM inference services, and identical services imply that\nthe models and runtime parameters (e.g., tensor parallelism\nand PD disaggregation configurations) they utilize are the\nsame. At the same time, the MaaS system typically pre-builds\ntemplates for LLM inference services to enable elastic deployment. These observations lead to our optimization principle\npre-building a template of the I/O pattern for each service,\nand then implementing an advanced policy that can automatically generate/parse I/O templates and perform specific I/O\noptimizations for different LLM inference services.\nThe high-level operational logic of MAIO is as follows. Be-\n\n* * *\n\nFigure 5: Implementation of MAIO. The prefetch/eviction function\nfirst parses the I/O miss event, then identifies the I/O group to which\nthe miss I/O belongs, and finally executes the policy logic to return\nthe list of I/Os to be prefetched/evicted.\n\nplate. If not, it executes the template generation process; otherwise, it performs the template-based cache policy.\n\nI/O Template Generation. As shown in Figure 5, each LLM\ninference service is associated with an I/O template, which\nrecords the I/O sequence of each XPU worker during the\nmodel loading. The inference framework assigns a worker\n(host-side process) to each XPU to load the required model\nweights to the device. The MaaS platform will assign an XPU\nlist to the inference service, and the inference framework will\nbind each XPU worker to the XPU in the list in a round-robin\nmanner and incrementally assign a logical ID (starting from\n0). To support refined policy design and multi-node inference,\nthe I/O template is divided into multiple I/O groups based\non the XPU worker ID. Each group contains multiple tuples\nand each tuple contains information about an I/O operation,\nincluding the file path, offset, and size of the accessed data.\nMAIO stores the I/O templates as files, and they can be kept\nin local or shared remote storage.\nMAIO performs I/O template detection within the ppc\\_init()\n\nMAIO performs I/O template detection within the ppc\\_init()\nfunction and executes the generation process if the target template does not exist. MAIO achieves I/O template generation\nby implementing a special ppc\\_prefetch() function. Since\nPPC calls ppc\\_prefetch for each I/O miss and passes the I/O\ninformation as its input parameter, MAIO can utilize the parameter to generate the I/O template and simply set the return\nvalue to NULL (without performing prefetch). Specifically,\nMAIO establishes the mapping between the I/O and the XPU\nworker ID by matching the process ID (PID) in the I/O information with the processes running on the XPUs. In the MaaS\nplatform, I/O template generation can be integrated into the\npre-built process of service templates.\nTemplate-based Cache Policy. The I/O template presents\n\nused. It first identifies the XPU where the I/O’s PID (from the\ninput I/O information) resides, then obtains the XPU worker\nID based on the XPU topology of the inference service. ❸\nMAIO performs the prefetch/eviction policy based on the I/O\ngroup corresponding to the XPU worker. MAIO proposes the\nfollowing three mechanisms:\n\n1. Interruptible Prefetching. Each time an I/O miss event\n\nfollowing three mechanisms:\n\n1. Interruptible Prefetching. Each time an I/O miss event\n   triggers ppc\\_prefetch(), MAIO locates the miss I/O within the\n   I/O group and then prefetches data from that position based\n   on the sequence in the I/O group. A challenge is determining\n   the prefetch size. A large prefetch size may lead to competition with front-end I/Os. For example, prefetching will result\n   in redundant data loading if it lags behind the progress of the\n   inference framework. However, a small prefetch size will result in insufficient bandwidth utilization. Benefiting from the\n   interruptible nature of the PPC loader, MAIO can aggressively\n   set the prefetch size from the I/O miss location to the end of\n   the I/O group. When a new I/O miss is triggered during the\n   prefetch (when the front-end I/O is faster than the prefetch\n   I/O), the ppc\\_prefetch() will be called again, and the starting\n   position of the prefetch will jump to the latest position of\n   the front-end I/O. The PPC loader will then interrupt the old\n   prefetch request to execute a new one, thereby avoiding redundant loading. In addition, interruptions can also be triggered\n   when memory is insufficient.\n2. XPU Affinity Loading. During the prefetching process,\n\nwhen memory is insufficient.\n2) XPU Affinity Loading. During the prefetching process,\nMAIO further controls the memory location where data is\nloaded to enhance the subsequent transmission efficiency between DRAM and XPUs. For each ppc\\_prefetch() call, MAIO\ncan dynamically detect the destination XPU of the data. The\nI/O template stores the mapping between data and logical\nWorker IDs (each XPU corresponds to one worker). Worker\nIDs are strictly increasing and are one-to-one mapped to the\nincreasing XPU numbers (the same worker loads the same\ndata each time). During loading, MAIO locates the target XPU\nbased on the Worker ID to which the data belongs (because\nMAIO knows the XPUs being used, the new Worker ID-XPU\nmapping can be obtained). Then, it finds the NUMA node\nthat is affine to the target XPU. The XPU affinity feature of\nthe PPC loader ensures that prefetched data is loaded into the\nNUMA node associated with the target XPU.\n3) Burn-after-Reading Eviction. In typical model load-\n\n3. Burn-after-Reading Eviction. In typical model loading, the model data remains in the devices’ HBM after being\n   loaded to the target XPUs, after which the host-side cache\n   holds little value. Since the front-end model loading I/Os are\n   executed in the order of the sequence in the I/O group, the data\n   before the miss I/O position is likely cold. MAIO designs the\n   BAR (Burn-after-Reading) eviction policy based on this characteristic. MAIO maintains an eviction cursor to distinguish\n   between evicted and non-evicted data. When ppc\\_evict() is\n   called, it evicts data between the current miss I/O position and\n   the eviction cursor, and updates the cursor. However, data near\n   the current miss I/O position may not yet have been loaded\n   into the XPU. To reduce the possibility of cache thrashing,\n\n* * *\n\nMAIO maintains a distance (1GB by default) between the end\nof the eviction and the current miss I/O position. The BAR\ndistance is an empirical value that ensures no cache thrashing\nin the scenarios we have verified.\n\nComparison with Other Policies. MAIO has significant advantages compared to existing cache policies for file systems:\nvs. Prediction-based Policies. This is the most widely ap-\n\nvs. Prediction-based Policies. This is the most widely applied type of policy, including the native kernel cache policy\nand its various optimized versions (e.g., CrossPrefetch \\[11\\]).\nThey often employ sampling in conjunction with traditional\nheat-based cache algorithms (e.g., LRU, LFU, ARC \\[23\\])\nto manage cache, which fails to accurately perceive the I/O\ncharacteristics in the model loading scenario, resulting in\nlow efficiency in prefetching and eviction. In contrast, the\ntemplate-based approach of MAIO can accurately perceive the\nI/O characteristics of model loading, encompassing not only\naccess timing but also XPU affinity and data lifecycle.\nvs. Experience-based Policies. This type of policy em-\n\nvs. Experience-based Policies. This type of policy employs a mechanism independent of the file system to perform\nprefetching/eviction based on user experience, e.g., blindly\nprefetching all data under the target path. For example, many\ncontainer image loading optimizations \\[13, 20, 21\\] specify\ndata priorities for precise prefetching (e.g., manually setting\nthe priority of files). However, these policies are suboptimal\nfor model loading. First, the I/O characteristics vary depending on the deployment form and model structure, making it\ndifficult to be accurately perceived by the user. Second, the\nlack of collaboration between the prefetching process and\nfront-end I/Os may lead to additional I/O contention. These\ntwo shortcomings are well addressed in MAIO.\nvs. LLM Framework-embedded Policies. This type of pol-\n\nvs. LLM Framework-embedded Policies. This type of policy (e.g., ServerlessLLM \\[9\\]) embeds a cache policy into the\nmodel loading logic of the inference framework, enabling it\nto precisely perceive the I/O characteristics. Despite their incompatibility, they still have shortcomings. First, they cannot\nfully utilize idle bandwidth during stages other than model\nloading, such as container startup and inference service initialization stages. Second, the existing works in this type lack\nconsideration of eviction policy. Compared to these works,\nMAIO has higher prefetching and eviction efficiency.\n\n4.2 Discussion\n\nThe following discussion arises from the design and industrial\npractice of MAIO:\nInference Service Dependence. Thanks to the strong com-\n\nand invoke the PPC interfaces to regenerate the I/O template,\nwhile MAIO does not need to bear the overhead of managing\nthe lifecycle of I/O templates.\nComplexity of Policy Programming. MAIO provides OS\n\nComplexity of Policy Programming. MAIO provides OS\ndevelopers with an automatic optimization policy for model\nloading (without detailed knowledge of the model). Even\nwithout MAIO, upper-level users can also easily utilize PPC\nto implement policies that meet their customized needs. Unlike related technologies (e.g., eBPF, FUSE), PPC does not\nrequire programmers to be familiar with the OS and storage\nsystems; they only need to implement the cache algorithm itself. Simplified programming can bring more possibilities for\nI/O optimization, e.g., model developers can directly program\nthe cache policies based on the model structures.\nResource Contention. Since MAIO is per-service, there\n\nResource Contention. Since MAIO is per-service, there\nmay be resource contention (e.g., I/O, CPU) among multiple\nMAIO instances when the node runs multiple inference services simultaneously. For containerized (mainstream) scenarios, each MAIO instance and its target service run in the same\ncgroup, which reuses the mature QoS control mechanisms\nof cloud platforms. For bare-metal scenarios, a feasible approach to handle resource contention is to add MAIO instances\nto different cgroups and achieve QoS control by configuring\nthe cgroup parameters, which will be our future work.\nHardware-Agnostic. The designs of MAIO are suitable for\n\nHardware-Agnostic. The designs of MAIO are suitable for\nmainstream accelerators (e.g., GPU, NPU). First, only the\nhost-to-device transfer of accelerator affects model loading,\nwhile using PCIe and integrating with host’s NUMA topology is a general architecture. Second, MAIO does not rely on\nhardware-specific features of the accelerator.\n\n4.3 Industrial Practice\n\nMAIO has been deployed in Intelligence BooM \\[28\\], an integrated inference solution designed for enterprise private\ndata centers. Intelligence BooM adopts the MaaS concept,\nproviding simple APIs for customers with one-click deployment of inference services. In the customer’s cluster, each\nnode is equipped with eight Ascend 910B3 NPUs interconnected via HCCS and four 48-core Kunpeng 920 5250 CPUs\n@ 2.6GHz, while nodes are interconnected through RDMA.\nThe inference services are deployed as containers, and they\nare orchestrated and scheduled through Kubernetes \\[18\\] and\nRay \\[1\\]. The inference framework adopts vLLM-Ascend \\[33\\],\nwhich operates on top of MindSpore \\[24\\]. In customer scenarios, they use different models for various businesses (e.g.,\nAgentic AI), so the inference service needs to adopt elastic\ndeployment to improve resource utilization. This makes the\nperformance of inference startup a critical metric.\n\n* * *\n\n(a) Model Loading Latency (no memory constraint)\n\n(b) Model Loading Latency (64G memory constraint)\n\nFigure 6: Model Loading Latency of Various Models.\n\n(a) Total Startup Latency (no memory constraint)\n\n(b) Total Startup Latency (64G memory constraint)\n\nAll experiments are run on a node with four 48-core Kunpeng\n920 5250 CPUs @ 2.60GHz, eight Ascend 910B2 NPUs, 1TB\nDRAM, and 3.75TB SSD. The software stack includes vLLM-\nAscend 0.9.2, PyTorch 2.5.1, and Linux kernel 5.10. Unless\notherwise specified, the inference service is deployed as a container and runs on four NPUs. We compare MAIO with typical\nmodel loading optimizations, including both compatible and\nincompatible optimizations.\nCompatible Optimizations. Optimizations in this category\n\ncgroup as its accelerated inference service. The I/O templates are stored on NFS, allowing them to be shared by all\nnodes. We evaluate the benefit of MAIO in Intelligence BooM\nby launching the DeepSeek-R1-671B inference service from\na cold start. The service runs on two nodes (16 NPUs), while\nthe model is stored on the local SSDs. Compared to directly\nloading from the local file system, MAIO can reduce the model\nloading latency from 649 seconds to 452 seconds. MAIO is\neven faster than fully caching the model in DRAM that has\na latency of 561 seconds, primarily due to the stacking of\nextensive I/Os and other processes of model loading (e.g.,\nmodel metadata parsing), while the XPU affinity accelerates\nthe transmission between the host and NPUs. It is noteworthy that in this customer scenario, MAIO has almost hidden\nthe I/O overhead from model loading, with the primary cost\nstemming from tensor formatting in MindSpore.\n\n5 Evaluation\n\na simple policy that prefetches the model in one go when the\nfirst I/O is triggered (using UPC), without eviction optimization. PreCache it pre-caches the entire model into memory,\ncompletely eliminating disk I/O during the model loading at\nthe cost of significant memory capacity. It is noteworthy that\nMAIO also belongs to this category.\nIncompatible Optimization. The optimizations in this cat-\n\nMAIO also belongs to this category.\nIncompatible Optimization. The optimizations in this category have a different design principle compared to MAIO.\nThey exhibit a strong dependency on both hardware and software, and the vast majority cannot be run on our NPU-based\ntestbed. We select ServerlessLLM \\[9\\] as the representative,\nwhich is a state-of-the-art incompatible optimization. It is\nnoteworthy that ServerlessLLM sacrifices certain aspects in\nexchange for performance, which is unnecessary for the evaluated compatible optimizations. First, it requires converting\nthe model format. Second, it requires the host’s free memory\nto exceed the model size and have additional HMB space, as\nit needs to pre-allocate and pin memory for DMA. We use\nSLLM-NPU for evaluation, which is the version of Serverless-\nLLM \\[9\\] adapted for NPU (by its authors). However, due\nto the high difficulty of adaptation, it has some bugs and\ncan only run with Transformers (vLLM unsupported). Therefore, we can only evaluate the model loading performance\nof SLLM-NPU in scenarios with sufficient memory. Another\nincompatible optimization, BlitzScale \\[39\\], is not included in\nthe comparison because it primarily optimizes model sharing\nbetween nodes (which is orthogonal to MAIO) and relies on\nthe specific hardware.\n\n5.1 Performance\n\n5.1.1 Model Loading Latency\nWe select five popular models\n\nWe select five popular models to evaluate the performance, including small (Qwen2.5-7B, Llama-7B), medium\n(Qwen2.5-32B), and large (Qwen2.5-72B, Llama-70B)\n\n* * *\n\nFigure 8: SSD Bandwidth Utilization of Inference Startup.\n\n(a) read\n\n(b) memcpy-after-mmap\n\nFigure 9: Overhead of PPC.\n\nFigure 6(b) shows the results in the memory-constrained\nscenario. MAIO reduces latency by up to 74% compared to\nother evaluated solutions. It is noteworthy that PreCache and\nEagerLoad do not show a significant advantage over Native.\nThe reason lies in the fact that they cause severe cache thrashing in the memory-constrained scenario. For PreCache, the\n\nFigure 6(a) shows the results in the sufficient memory scenario. MAIO is up to 79% faster than Native in model loading.\nThe primary benefit stems from the prefetch optimization in\nMAIO, which allows for more efficient utilization of SSD\nbandwidth. EagerLoad accelerates model loading compared\nto Native because it hides the I/O overhead to some extent. However, EagerLoad is up to 32% slower than MAIO,\nbecause it cannot perform precise prefetching. PreCache improves performance at the cost of increased memory usage\n(i.e., the entire model is cached in memory), but it is still up\nto 37% slower than MAIO, due to insufficient consideration\nof XPU affinity. Compared to the incompatible optimization,\nMAIO reduces latency by up to 17% over SLLM-NPU in the\nlarge model scenarios. The reason is that MAIO can sense\nand trigger prefetching during the first access of the file system by the inference framework, allowing I/O overhead to be\noverlapped with more processes of the inference framework\n(e.g., container initialization, model structure parsing). In contrast, SLLM-NPU only performs prefetching during the model\nloading stage (by modifying the inference framework), thus\nfailing to fully utilize the idle SSD bandwidth.\nFigure 6(b) shows the results in the memory-constrained\n\ncache is pre-filled with a portion of the model data, and if\nthe I/O for model loading incurs a cache miss, it will trigger the kernel’s native eviction mechanism to discard data\nthat may be used in the future. For EagerLoad, simple batch\nprefetching leads to the eviction of data that has already been\nprefetched but not yet used. In contrast, the BAR eviction\nand interruptible prefetching in MAIO perceives the real-time\nstate of memory usage and model loading process, thereby\nachieving more efficient I/O control.\n\n5.1.2 Inference Startup Latency\nThe process of starting the inference service not only includes\nmodel loading but also involves the initialization of the inference framework (e.g., container initialization.) and the startup\nof the inference service (e.g., KV cache initialization). Figure 7(a) shows the results in the sufficient memory scenario.\nMAIO delivers up to 38% latency reduction over Native,\nthanks to faster model loading. Compared to PreCache and\nEagerLoad, MAIO offers up to 6.6% performance improvement. It is noteworthy that PreCache requires a significant\namount of memory to achieve this performance, thereby reducing the available capacity of the KV cache during the inference process. Figure 7(b) shows the results in the memoryconstrained scenario. Compared to other comparative solutions, MAIO reduces latency by up to 51% due to its significant\nperformance advantage in model loading.\n\n* * *\n\nFigure 10: Memory Overhead of PPC.\n\nmodel loading, and service start. The experiments are run on\nQwen2.5-72B, considering both sufficient and constrained\nmemory scenarios.\nFigure 8(a) shows the results in the sufficient memory sce-\n\nmemory scenarios.\nFigure 8(a) shows the results in the sufficient memory scenario. In Native, I/Os are concentrated during the model loading stages, and they cannot fully utilize the SSD bandwidth\nduring the framework initialization and model loading stages.\nThe reason is that the native prefetching policy of the kernel\nonly prefetches a segment of data adjacent to the triggered I/O\n(within the same file), and it cannot leverage the high concurrency advantages of SSD. In contrast, the I/O operations of\nEagerLoad and MAIO are concentrated during the framework\ninitialization stage and (almost) fully utilize the maximum\nbandwidth of the SSD, which results in nearly all I/Os during\nthe model loading stage being cache hits. The reason is that\nPPC will detect and trigger user-defined prefetching functions while employing high-concurrency loading when the\ninference framework first accesses the file system. In this scenario, the performance advantage of MAIO over EagerLoad\nprimarily stems from the design of XPU affinity loading.\nFigure 8(b) shows the results in the memory-constrained\n\n5.2 Design Analysis\n\n5.2.1 Overhead of PPC\n\nFigure 8(b) shows the results in the memory-constrained\nscenario. The bandwidth utilization of Native is worse com-\n\nscenario. The bandwidth utilization of Native is worse compared to when memory is sufficient, due to the overhead intro-\n\npared to when memory is sufficient, due to the overhead introduced by eviction. However, the performance of EagerLoad\nis the worst in this scenario. EagerLoad employs the native\n\nis the worst in this scenario. EagerLoad employs the native\neviction mechanism in the kernel and lacks precise prefetch-\n\nis the worst in this scenario. EagerLoad employs the native\neviction mechanism in the kernel and lacks precise prefetch-\n\neviction mechanism in the kernel and lacks precise prefetching control, causing it to blindly load and evict data during\nthe framework initialization stage. This results in more severe\n\nthe framework initialization stage. This results in more severe\ncache thrashing for EagerLoad during the model loading\nstage compared to Native. In contrast, MAIO does not utilize the full bandwidth but offers the shortest latency in this\nscenario, because it will evict already used data based on the\ncurrent I/O position in the I/O template, while also controlling\nthe size of the prefetching I/Os.\n\nthe framework initialization stage. This results in more severe\ncache thrashing for EagerLoad during the model loading\nstage compared to Native. In contrast, MAIO does not utilize the full bandwidth but offers the shortest latency in this\nscenario, because it will evict already used data based on the\ncurrent I/O position in the I/O template, while also controlling\nthe size of the prefetching I/Os.\n\nFigure 11: Performance Breakdown of MAIO.\n\nbetween scenarios with and without PPC. We also compare\nRFUSE \\[6\\] (an optimized version of FUSE) to demonstrate\nthe differences between PPC and existing compatibility programming framework. All comparison systems adopt the native cache policy (prefetching and eviction) of the kernel. We\nsequentially perform read and memcpy-after-mmap with\n1MB I/Os on a 10GB file to evaluate the read performance,\nand perform stat on a directory containing 1K files to evaluate the metadata performance.\nThe overhead of PPC consists mainly of RFS and\n\nate the metadata performance.\nThe overhead of PPC consists mainly of RFS and\nCPRT. Thanks to the lightweight stacking and non-blocking\nUPC mechanism, the additional overhead introduced by\nPPC is small. Figure 9 shows the results. Taking the\nmemcpy-after-mmap case as an example, on EXT4 (XFS),\nPPC introduces an overhead of up to 3.7% (6.4%), whereas\nRFUSE introduces an overhead of up to 14% (15%). The\nresults also demonstrate that PPC does not negatively impact the scalability of the underlying file system. Because\nRFS does not change the concurrency mechanism of the file\nsystem, while CPRT has good scalability.\n\n5.2.2 Memory and CPU Overhead\nWe further analyze the memory and CPU overhead caused\n\nWe further analyze the memory and CPU overhead caused\nby PPC. To demonstrate memory overhead, we measure the\nmemory usage of the PPC process (excluding the VFS page\n\nmemory usage of the PPC process (excluding the VFS page\ncache) under the read and memcpy-after-mmap scenarios\nin the experiments described in § 5.2.1. Figure 10 shows that\nthe memory overhead of PPC is small (around 30MB), and is\nnot significantly affected by access patterns or concurrency.\nThis is because the memory overhead mainly comes from\nthe metadata of RFS and event messages of UPC, which are\ncompact in size. The CPU overhead mainly comes from UPC\nevent listening and data loading. The overhead of UPC event\nlistening is about 1% to 11% (varying with concurrency)\nin the read and memcpy-after-mmap scenarios, while the\noverhead of data loading is closely related to the application\nworkload (e.g., the data volume, I/O pattern).\n\nmemory usage of the PPC process (excluding the VFS page\ncache) under the read and memcpy-after-mmap scenarios\nin the experiments described in § 5.2.1. Figure 10 shows that\nthe memory overhead of PPC is small (around 30MB), and is\nnot significantly affected by access patterns or concurrency.\nThis is because the memory overhead mainly comes from\nthe metadata of RFS and event messages of UPC, which are\ncompact in size. The CPU overhead mainly comes from UPC\nevent listening and data loading. The overhead of UPC event\nlistening is about 1% to 11% (varying with concurrency)\nin the read and memcpy-after-mmap scenarios, while the\noverhead of data loading is closely related to the application\nworkload (e.g., the data volume, I/O pattern).\n\n* * *\n\nTable 3: Size of I/O Template.\n\n| Model | Spec. | Model Size | I/O Temp. Size |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| Qwen2.5-7B | Node=1TP=4 | 15GB | 11KB |\n| Qwen2.5-32B | 62GB | 32KB |  |\n| Qwen2.5-72B | 136GB | 95KB |  |\n| Llama-7B | 15GB | 14KB |  |\n| Llama-70B | 132GB | 118KB |  |\n| DeepSeek-R1-671B | Node=2TP=16 | 662GB | 545KB |\n\ning the direct use of the kernel file system. We conduct experiments using Qwen2.5-72B and Llama-70B under different\nmemory capacities. Figure 11(a) shows the results in the sufficient memory scenario. Compared to the baseline, the model\nloading latency is decreased by more than 65% by enabling\nthe interruptible prefetching (Base+P), and further enabling\nthe XPU affinity loading (Base+P+A) can reduce the latency\nby more than 8.5% on this basis. However, enabling the BAR\neviction (Base+P+A+E) has little impact on performance improvement, as the eviction policy is not the core bottleneck\nin the sufficient memory scenario. Figure 11(b) shows the results in the memory-constrained scenario. For Qwen2.5-72B\n(Llama-70B), gradually enabling the interruptible prefetching, XPU affinity loading, and BAR eviction brings about\nmore than 47% (44%), 6% (4%), and 19% (23%) stacking improvements compared to the baseline, respectively, indicating\nthat all designs have significant benefits.\n5.2.4 Storage Overhead of I/O Template\n\n(a) no memory constraint\n\n5.2.4 Storage Overhead of I/O Template\nThe optimization of MAIO relies on I/O templates, which\n\n5.2.4 Storage Overhead of I/O Template\nThe optimization of MAIO relies on I/O templates, which\nintroduces additional storage overhead. Table 3 presents\nthe I/O template sizes for several inference services. Even\na model with hundreds of billions of parameters like\nDeepSeek-R1-671B has an I/O template size of only 545KB.\nThis is because the information in the I/O template is highly\ncompact, and the template generation in MAIO further consolidates consecutive I/Os. In addition, the I/O template size\ndoes not change with variations in the deployment form (e.g.,\ndifferent tensor parallelism sizes) of the inference service.\nThis experiment demonstrates that the storage overhead of\nthe I/O template is almost negligible.\n\n(b) 64G memory constraint\n\nFigure 12: Inference Throughput in the MaaS Workload.\n\nFigure 12 shows the results. Compared to Native, MAIO\ncan deliver up to 13% and 28% throughput improvements in\nscenarios with sufficient and insufficient memory, respectively.\nMeanwhile, the performance advantage of MAIO diminishes\nas the elastic interval increases, due to the reduced proportion of model loading overhead. Compared to PreCache and\nEagerLoad, MAIO does not show significant advantages in\nthe sufficient memory scenario, but it offers an average performance improvement of 19% and 21% in the insufficient\nmemory scenario. Additionally, we have gained two insights\nfrom industrial practice. Firstly, the PreCache solution is impractical in the real-world system due to the massive volume\nof model data. Secondly, the insufficient memory scenario is\ncommon in real-world workloads.\n\nModel loading is a critical bottleneck in inference service\nstartup. However, existing optimizations for model loading\nlack compatibility, thereby limiting their application scenarios.\nThis work accelerates model loading by optimizing the page\ncache policy of the file system and strives to ensure compatibility with the inference ecosystem, OS, and hardware. We\npropose PPC, an efficient programmable page cache framework that allows users to customize the kernel’s cache policy.\nFurthermore, we design MAIO based on PPC, a cache policy optimized for model loading. The evaluation shows that\nMAIO significantly improves the model loading performance\ncompared with the existing solutions in many scenarios.\n\n* * *\n\nReferences\n\n\\[1\\] Anyscale. Ray Serve: Scalable and programmable serving. [https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/serve/](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/serve/)\nindex.html, September 2025.\n\\[2\\] Ashish Bijlani and Umakishore Ramachandran. Extension framework for file systems in user space. In\nProceedings of the USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC), 2019.\n\\[3\\] Peter Braam. The Lustre storage architecture. arXiv\npreprint arXiv:1903.01955, 2019.\n\\[4\\] Xuechun Cao, Shaurya Patel, Soo Yee Lim, Xueyuan\nHan, and Thomas Pasquier. FetchBPF: Customizable\nprefetching policies in Linux with eBPF. In Proceedings\nof the USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC),\n2024.\n\\[5\\] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan,\nHenrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri\nEdwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael\nPetrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin,\nBrooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov,\nAlethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian,\nClemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such,\nDave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis,\nElizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie\nTang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain,\nWilliam Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr,\nJan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,\nAlec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira\nMurati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew,\nDario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and\nWojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374,\n2021.\n\\[6\\] Kyu-Jin Cho, Jaewon Choi, Hyungjoon Kwon, and Jin-\nSoo Kim. RFUSE: Modernizing userspace filesystem\nframework through scalable Kernel-Userspace communication. In Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on\nFile and Storage Technologies (FAST), 2024.\n\\[7\\] Alibaba Cloud. Bailian. [https://bailian.console](https://bailian.console/).\naliyun.com/, September 2025.\n\\[8\\] Huawei Cloud. ModelArts. [https://www](https://www/).\nhuaweicloud.com/product/modelarts.html,\nSeptember 2025.\n\\[9\\] Yao Fu, Leyang Xue, Yeqi Huang, Andrei-Octavian\nBrabete, Dmitrii Ustiugov, Yuvraj Patel, and Luo Mai.\nServerlessLLM: Low-latency serverless inference for\n\nlarge language models. In Proceedings of the USENIX\nSymposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), 2024.\n\\[10\\] Wensheng Gan, Shicheng Wan, and Philip S. Yu. Modelas-a-Service (MaaS): A survey. In Proceedings of the\nIEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData),\n2023.\n\\[11\\] Shaleen Garg, Jian Zhang, Rekha Pitchumani,\nManish Parashar, Bing Xie, and Sudarsun Kannan.\nCrossPrefetch: Accelerating I/O prefetching for modern\nstorage. In Proceedings of the ACM International\nConference on Architectural Support for Programming\nLanguages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), 2024.\n\\[12\\] GitHub. Copilot. [https://github.com/features/](https://github.com/features/)\ncopilot, September 2025.\n\\[13\\] Tyler Harter, Brandon Salmon, Rose Liu, Andrea C.\nArpaci-Dusseau, and Remzi H. Arpaci-Dusseau.\nSlacker: Fast distribution with lazy docker containers.\nIn Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on File and\nStorage Technologies (FAST), 2016.\n\\[14\\] Frank Herold and Sven Breuner. An introduction\nto BeeGFS. [https://www.beegfs.io/docs/](https://www.beegfs.io/docs/)\nwhitepapers/Introduction\\_to\\_BeeGFS\\_by\\_\nThinkParQ.pdf, June 2018.\n\\[15\\] Junhao Hu, Jiang Xu, Zhixia Liu, Yulong He, Yuetao\nChen, Hao Xu, Jiang Liu, Jie Meng, Baoquan Zhang,\nShining Wan, Gengyuan Dan, Zhiyu Dong, Zhihao\nRen, Changhong Liu, Tao Xie, Dayun Lin, Qin Zhang,\nYue Yu, Hao Feng, Xusheng Chen, and Yizhou Shan.\nDeepServe: Serverless large language model serving at\nscale. In Proceedings of the USENIX Annual Technical\nConference (ATC), 2025.\n\\[16\\] Qianbo Huai, Windsor Hsu, Jiwei Lu, Hao Liang, Haobo\nXu, and Wei Chen. XFUSE: An infrastructure for running filesystem services in user space. In Proceedings of\nthe USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC), 2021.\n\\[17\\] Linux Kernel. OverlayFS. [https://docs.kernel](https://docs.kernel/).\norg/filesystems/overlayfs.html, September\n2025.\n\\[18\\] Kubernetes. Production-grade container orchestration.\n[https://kubernetes.io/](https://kubernetes.io/), September 2025.\n\\[19\\] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying\nSheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on\nOperating Systems Principles (SOSP), 2023.\n\n* * *\n\n\\[20\\] Huiba Li, Yifan Yuan, Rui Du, Kai Ma, Lanzheng Liu,\nand Windsor Hsu. DADI: Block-level image service for\nagile and elastic application deployment. In Proceedings\nof the USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC),\n2020.\n\\[21\\] Yubo Liu, Hongbo Li, Mingrui Liu, Rui Jing, Jian Guo,\nBo Zhang, Hanjun Guo, Yuxin Ren, and Ning Jia. FlacIO: Flat and collective I/O for container image service.\nIn Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on File and\nStorage Technologies (FAST), 2025.\n\\[22\\] Yubo Liu, Yuxin Ren, Mingrui Liu, Hongbo Li, Hanjun\nGuo, Xie Miao, Xinwei Hu, and Haibo Chen. Optimizing file systems on heterogeneous memory by integrating DRAM cache with virtual memory management.\nIn Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on File and\nStorage Technologies (FAST), 2024.\n\\[23\\] Nimrod Megiddo and Dharmendra S. Modha. ARC:\nA Self-Tuning, low overhead replacement cache. In\nProceedings of the USENIX Conference on File and\nStorage Technologies (FAST), 2003.\n\\[24\\] MindSpore. Open source deep learning training/inference framework. [https://www.mindspore.cn/en](https://www.mindspore.cn/en),\nSeptember 2025.\n\\[25\\] NVIDIA. NVLink. [https://www.nvidia.com/](https://www.nvidia.com/)\nen-us/data-center/nvlink/, September 2025.\n\\[26\\] OpenAI. Introducing ChatGPT. [https://openai](https://openai/).\ncom/blog/chatgpt/, September 2025.\n\\[27\\] OpenAI. OpenAI. [https://openai.com/](https://openai.com/), September\n2025.\n\\[28\\] openEuler. Intelligence BooM. [https://atomgit](https://atomgit/).\ncom/openeuler/llm\\_solution, September 2025.\n\\[29\\] Niki Rahimi. fadvise(2) - Linux man page. https://\nlinux.die.net/man/2/fadvise, September 2025.\n\\[30\\] Yuxin Ren, Mingrui Liu, Hongbo Li, Chang Liao, Xiaojia Huang, Jianhua Zhang, Hanjun Guo, Yubo Liu,\nand Ning Jia. Towards rack-as-a-computer in memory\ninterconnect era with coordinated operating system sharing. In Proceedings of the Conference on Hot Topics in\nStorage and File Systems (HotStorage), 2025.\n\\[31\\] ShareGPT. ShareGPT. [https://huggingface.co/](https://huggingface.co/)\ndatasets/anon8231489123/ShareGPT\\_Vicuna\\_\nunfiltered, September 2025.\n\\[32\\] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale,\nDan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya\n\nChen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao,\nVedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn,\nSaghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas,\nViktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem\nKorenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux,\nThibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu,\nYuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar\nMishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton,\nJeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan\nSchelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor,\nAdina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng\nYan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie\nKambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert\nStojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. Llama\n2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv\npreprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.\n\\[33\\] vLLM. vLLM Ascend plugin. [https://github.com/](https://github.com/)\nvllm-project/vllm-ascend, September 2025.\n\\[34\\] Sage A. Weil, Scott A. Brandt, Ethan L. Miller, Darrell\nD. E. Long, and Carlos Maltzahn. Ceph: A scalable,\nhigh-performance distributed file system. In Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on Operating Systems\nDesign and Implementation (OSDI), 2006.\n\\[35\\] Jing Xia, Chuanning Cheng, Xiping Zhou, Yuxing Hu,\nand Peter Chun. Kunpeng 920: The first 7-nm chipletbased 64-core arm soc for cloud services. IEEE Micro,\n41(5):6775, 2021.\n\\[36\\] Jian Xu and Steven Swanson. NOVA: A log-structured\nfile system for hybrid volatile/non-volatile main memories. In Proceedings of the USENIX Conference on File\nand Storage Technologies (FAST), 2016.\n\\[37\\] Yanan Yang, Laiping Zhao, Yiming Li, Huanyu Zhang,\nJie Li, Mingyang Zhao, Xingzhen Chen, and Keqiu Li.\nINFless: a native serverless system for low-latency, highthroughput inference. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for\nProgramming Languages and Operating Systems (ASP-\nLOS), 2022.\n\\[38\\] Anil Yelam, Kan Wu, Zhiyuan Guo, Suli Yang, Rajath\nShashidhara, Wei Xu, Stanko Novakovic, Alex C. Snoeren, and Kimberly Keeton. PageFlex: Flexible and\nefficient user-space delegation of Linux paging policies\nwith eBPF. In Proceedings of the USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC), 2025.\n\\[39\\] Dingyan Zhang, Haotian Wang, Yang Liu, Xingda Wei,\nYizhou Shan, Rong Chen, and Haibo Chen. BlitzScale:\nFast and live large model autoscaling with O(1) host\ncaching. In Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on\n\n* * *\n\nOperating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI),\n\n\\[40\\] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Bar- rett, and Ying Sheng. SGLang: Efficient execution of structured language model programs. In Proceedings of the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.\n\n\\[41\\] Tal Zussman, Ioannis Zarkadas, Jeremy Carin, Andrew Cheng, Hubertus Franke, Jonas Pfefferle, and Asaf Cidon. cache\\_ext: Customizing the page cache with eBPF. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Oper- ating Systems Principles (SOSP), 2025.\n\n132 24th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association","metadata":{"scrapeId":"019e08f6-87e1-748c-a6b8-a041e0d8f783","sourceURL":"https://www.usenix.org/system/files/fast26-liu-yubo.pdf","url":"https://www.usenix.org/system/files/fast26-liu-yubo.pdf","statusCode":200,"numPages":17,"contentType":"application/pdf","proxyUsed":"basic","cacheState":"hit","cachedAt":"2026-05-08T18:59:34.069Z","creditsUsed":17,"concurrencyLimited":false}}